---
layout: post
author: Martin Elsman
category : lessons
tags : [student projects,mlkit,smackage,Standard ML,HIPERFIT]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

I'm continuously soliciting project ideas from good students in the
areas of functional programming, functional parallel programming, and
functional high-performance computational finance.

Projects can range from purely theoretical to more practically
oriented projects.

## Topics related to HIPERFIT

Please see the [HIPERFIT student projects
page](http://hiperfit.dk/studentprojects.html) for project suggestions
related to functional high-performance computational finance.

## Topics related to Standard ML

I have a special interest in the Standard ML programming language, in
particular through the [MLKit project](http://www.elsman.com/mlkit/)
and the various [MLKit spin-off
projects](http://www.elsman.com/projects.html), such as
[SMLserver](http://smlserver.org),
[SMLtoJs](http://smlserver.org/smltojs), and
[SMLonline](http://smlserver.org/ide). If you are interested in doing
any kind of work related to the above projects, please let me
know. Possible topics include reactive programming with SMLtoJs, GPGPU
programming in the browser with shaders and SMLtoJs, game programming
in SMLtoJs, advanced features in the SMLonline IDE (intellicense, and
error feedback), and collaborative programming in a browser IDE.

I have recently started using
[Smackage](http://github.com/standardml/smackage) for maintaining
Standard ML libraries; see my blog entry on [Getting Started with
Smackage](/lessons/2014/10/02/getting-started-with-smackage). Smackage
is a relative new invention and more infrastructure is needed for
easing the daily life with Smackage, including work on library
documentation tools (e.g., improvement of
[SigDoc](https://github.com/melsman/sigdoc)) and Smackage build
support. Let me know if you would be interested in work in this area.

## The Project Description

The time I spend on supervision of a project is usually strongly
correlated with the time and effort provided by the student(s). In the
project period, I usually schedule a one-hour weekly meeting and I
expect students to send an agenda for the meeting the day before the
meeting. I expect the student to be aware of all the formal
requirements with respect to turn-in dates and so on. I usually
recommend that projects (also smaller 7.5ECTS projects) are examined
using an external examiner from a neighboring university.

The first artifact to work out when preparing for a project is the
_project description_, which needs to contain motivation for the
project, a thesis statement to be tested, information about how the
thesis is tested (programming, benchmark tests, formal reasoning, unit
tests, ...), including information about methodology, and finally, a
section describing a time-line for the project (with milestones).

## Still Interested?

If you find that you could envision yourself doing a project in
one of the above areas, drop me an email and we can arrange for a 1/2
hour meeting for discussing the possibilities.

## Examples of Supervised Projects

Here is a list of some example projects I have supervised or
co-supervised:

- Niels G. W. Serup. Kernel Fission for GPGPUs. BSc thesis. DIKU. June 2014. Co-supervisor.

- Philip Munksgaard. SmlCL - An ML Library for Utilizing Parallel
  Architectures using OpenCL. DIKU BSc thesis project. June 2013. Supervisor.

- Rasmus Borgsmidt. Functional Array Programming Compiled to a Virtual
  Machine. DIKU BSc thesis project. June 2013. Co-supervisor.

- Nis Wegmann. First-class, Scoped Type Classes for Dependently Typed
  Languages. DIKU MSc thesis project. January 2013.

- Esben Bistrup Halvorsen. Calculating Key Ratios for Financial
  Products using Automatic Differentiation and Monte Carlo
  Simulation. DIKU MSc student project. December 2012. Supervisor. [PDF](/pdf/ad_esben.pdf).

- Kenneth Sj√∏holm. AJAX Programming in Standard ML. ITU MSc thesis
  project. May 2008. Supervisor.

- Anders Bille. AJAX Applications in ML. ITU MSc thesis
  project. November 2007. Supervisor.

